# Buffalo's Opinionated Guide to the CS/SE Department

These are notes that accompany my mini-lectures for new advisees
entering the CSSE department.  Be sure to look at them with the
recorded lectures!

# Introduction

## Call me Buffalo

It's my nickname.  I am official Associate Professor Dr. Michael
Hewner. In the CSSE department we usually call professors by their
first names, but there is already a Michael so people call me Buffalo.

## What is this thing I am watching?

So I noticed that I was spending a lot of time with my new advisees
going over basic stuff.  I don't mind answering any questions you have
but I'd like our time together to be more of a conversation and less
me hitting critical talking points.  So I thought I'd make these
videos to get you acclimated.

I also thought it might be nice to have them stored somewhere so you
could refer back if you need.

I made it for my advisees but you might have found it some other way -
if so welcome!

## Why is it "opinionated"?

The key thing is that this is not an official department resource and
what I say here is not official department policy.  I'll never say
anything I think is untrue *but* other folks in the department might
have disagree.  Please rely on official things like the course catalog
for rules and requirements and get opinions from a variety of sources
for your life advice!

## How should I use these videos?

If you're my advisee, I'd like to you watch these videos before we meet
for the first time.  I'd also like you to keep a pen/paper handy so
you can jot down questions you have and we can discuss them when you
meet.

I'll also want you to make a 4 year plan which is the topic of my
first couple videos.

# Getting Started with your 4 Year Plan

Ok the first thing I want you to do is make a 4-year plan.  That might
seem like jumping the gun a bit, but actually the process of
attempting to do that will help you focus.  This is something you'll
revise many times so please don't stress about getting it perfect at
first.

So first let's talk about what you need:

## The course catalog webpage for your degree

That should be Computer Science or Software Engineering.  If you're
not sure which you want, just pick one for now and I'll address the
issue in a later video (of course you could always peek ahead if you
just can't wait).

Go here

https://www.rose-hulman.edu/academics/course-catalog/current/index.html

and select your choice from the list on the right.  It probably
wouldn't hurt in the slightest to read this whole page, but what we
will be focusing on is two places:

* Summary of graduation requirements for the *whatever* major

* Plan of Study (top right)

## Some logical guesses as to your incoming credits

Most folks who have credit coming in have it in the form of AP exams.
If that's you can find the official chart in the course catalog:

https://www.rose-hulman.edu/academics/course-catalog/current/advanced-placement.html

Make a list of all the courses you're getting credit for from your AP
exams.

If you have credit from some other way, it'll probably need explicit
approval and that will be a process - that's something your advisor
can help you with.

But for now, just make a guess as to what your other things will count
as approximately.  So if you've taken Chemistry 1 at some other school
write Chemistry??? on your list.

I'll have more specifics about CS courses specifically later, let's
just not worry about that for now.

## A spreadsheet

There are a lot of ways you could build a four year plan - here I'm
gonna start you off with a really simple one.  This is something you
can customize, rework, as you go - and I encourage you to do so.  The
only bad 4-year plan is no four year plan.

[My starting spreaksheet](Blank 4 Year Plan.xlsx)

# Making a basic 4 year plan

## Slight Warning

Note: We're building a simplified plan as you're just getting started.
Please note that there a some complexities I'm not getting into which
means you should use the course catalog as the final guide to what the
graduation requirements are for a degree.

## Here we go!

The idea is pretty simple: copy the course from the sample 4 year plan
into the appropriate year on the spreadsheet.  Don't worry about AP
credit etc. yet.

## Now pull off the stuff you have credit for

That should leave some holes in the schedule.

## Done

For now anyway!  But think - what do I want *more* of?

# Adding Stuff to Your 4 Year Plan

From here you could be mostly done, or you could have a lot to do.  A lot
depends on if you have a lot of incoming credits or a few.  Even if you have 
no incoming credits, though, you still have some choices - and it's worth it
to give some thought to it now.

Basically, my advice is the more credits you have the more weird stuff you can 
do.  With no incoming credit you can do 1 weird thing.  With lots of incoming 
credit you can do a couple weird things.  But what's a weird thing?

* A minor
* A second major
* Study abroad
* A co-op
* Graduating early 
* Maybe some other stuff

## Do I really have time for this stuff?

So it might seem you don't have much time beyond the requirements of the major.  
But that's a little misleading.  The reason is the way electives work.  Say you 
wanted to minor in Biology.  Here's what the minor says:

    All students must complete BIO110 (Cell Structure and Function) or BIO130 (Evolution and Diversity) and four more courses in biology (BIO) or allied areas, above those
    courses already specifically required to fulfill the student's major, subject to the following requirements:

    a. At least three of the four electives must be BIO courses. 
    b. At least three of the electives must be 200-level or above. 

Ok, that looks like 6 courses.  But the thing is that the CS major has
a science elective, which can be filled by biology courses.  So we
could call that BIO110.  CS also had a technical elective, which can
alo be a bio course - let's call that BIO130. CS also has 20 credits
of free electives - those 5 courses can be anything.  So actually you
can get a minor in Biology with no additional courses.  Add a second
minor though, and you might need some AP credit to prevent
overloading.

Incidently, this ability to count the same courses multiple ways for
different requirements is particularly powerful in the SE curriculum.
Initially it might seem like there's not much space in SE because of
the domain track but because the domain track can be a minor or other
things, actually its usually quite easy to combine SE with other
majors.

## Required credits

Counting things multiple ways does have its limits though.  Every
degree has a certain number of credits required.  That means even if
one course can check several boxes - overall you need X credits in
total to get the degree.  Things like taking AP exams actually give
you credits - these things let you graduate faster.  Other things
might let you (say) get a minor with no additional courses - but don't
actually reduce the amount of courses you have to take before you
graduate, just let you pick your courses more freely.

This is not something you usually need to stress about, just realize
that its not possible to game the system too much.

# A Summary of weird things and commentary

## Minors

So most schedules can easily accommodate a minor - if you plan on them
in advance.  So if you'd like to take a minor - start seeing how you
might arrange that.

To see what's required for a minor, look it up in the Course Catalog.
Generally speaking the course catalog is your bible for rules
involving degrees and requirements.  Don't rely on sketchy videos like
this one - trust the source when planning degrees!

One thing to note when talking about minors is that certain popular
minors (art, Japanese, etc.) would be very easy to get IF one could
easily register for these classes - but the classes tend to fill up.
Sometimes the minor might have special rules that give priority to
students registered for the minor (Japanese is like this).  Others
don't and as a freshman you might not be able to take classes in
Freshman or Sophmore years.  This sometimes means you have to be a
little more careful in planning your courses - moving certain
requirements earlier so that you can take certian electives later when
you can register for minor courses.  Other minors are pretty easy to
get in - so this is something to stragegize with your advisor about.

## Second Majors

So a second or 3rd major can be a lot easier or harder depending on
overlap.  My favorite double major CS/SE, only requires 4 additional
courses because the two degree programs have a lot in common - that's
less than a lot of minors.  On the other hand, a 2nd major like
Biology is going to take a lot more work - but is still very doable.

The rules for double majoring can be a little complicated, but the
basics are usually easy.  Look at the department that has the major
(so if we were talking about Biology, that's the BIO department).  Now
look at the requirements for the Biology degree, concentrating on
courses WITHIN the deparment (the BIO courses required by the Biology
major).  These are the courses you are required to take.  In addition,
to take these BIO courses you might need certian pre-req courses not
required by your first major.  You have to take those prereqs too.

Note that because of this rule, it matters slightly which major is
your first major.  For the first major you take all the courses (in
department and outside) but for the others mostly just in the
in-department courses.  But for your first stab this kind of nit
picking is not usually important - pick one for now and talk to your
advisor latter about the details.

I really like double majoring in CS/SE (or SE/CS as I said it matters
a little)...but I actually have a whole lecture on that next so lets
leave that to then.

Sometimes students will get a little crazy with 2nd majors
CS/SE/Math/Data Science or whatever.  There is no limit BUT realize
that after degree 2 most employers are like "I can see this student is
clearly motivated" and after that point more degrees aren't gonna make
the difference in hiring.  So realize that if you do pile on the
degrees, it's mostly for your own amusement.

There is also something called Dual Degrees which is different and not
usually want most students want.  Feel free to ask me about it if
you're curious.

You have to fill out a form to register for a major or minor
officially, but I usually don't recommend doing that until your
sophmore year unless you have a reason.

## International Experiences

So if you'd like to experience life in a different country (and your
not one of our international students doing that by attending Rose)
there are a lot of different options - that take different amounts of
time.

There are sometimes individual courses that include international
travel (often geared at 1st year students).  You can spend the summer
abroad.  You can take 1 semester abroad and one of our sister schools.
There's even the International Computer Science degree where you spend
a whole year in Germany.

If you'd like to do this, the main thing think about in terms of
planning is how much international stuff you'd like to do and when
you'd like to do it.  Then pencil that in on your 4-year plan and in
the future talk to the global programs office (or your advisor) to
figure out what the specifics would be.

https://www.rose-hulman.edu/academics/global-programs/index.html

## Coop

So almost all CS/SE students do some industry work over the summer as
part of their degree.  Most traditional in our major is internships -
these start and end in the summer.

But some companies do offer coops - basically a longer internship that
basically amounts you skipping 1 term in addition to the Summer.  For
companies that are looking for coops, they are often very interested
in any student who has the space in their schedule to handle that.

Basically, a coop means you have to leave 1 term blank and get all
your classes done in the other terms.  If you'd like to try this, I'd
usually suggest planning to do it at the end of your sophomore year.

## Graduating Early

It's usually difficult to graduate CS 1 term early because the senior
project normally requires being at school for 3 consecutive terms in
your senior year (there are some solutions to this - but tricky).

Sometimes though students with a *lot* of incoming credits try and
graduate in 3 years.  It can be done but it's very intense - but the
upside is you save some money.

If you want to try this you need to decide on it right away.  This is
one case where you'll want to make it official in your first term:
doing so will grant you registration priority in your later terms
which will make getting all the courses you need easier.

## Something else

All the things I've talked about are things that would happen within
the auspices of the school, but it is possible for you to arrange an
empty or light term for your own benefit.  I like to see students take
a proactive approach to their education so please ponder what you'd
like to do in your college years and if you can up with some crazy
idea let me know and we can see if it can be arranged.

# Computer Science?  Software Engineering? Both!

Ok now I'm gonna talk about my favorite weird thing a double major CS/SE degree.

## Difference between CS and SE

They're pretty similar but here's the jist.

* CS - focused on the mathematics of designing algorithms
* SE - focused on the issues of building large software projects

For most of the first 2 years of the degree, these 2 programs are the same.

If you had to pick only 1, I'd reccommend taking SE as long as you
were planning to go into the programming industry after graduation.
If you were planning on graduate school, CS is maybe a better choice.
But I don't think you should decide - I think you should go with both.

## Why is CS/SE a good thing?

SE includes a lot of really useful skills that a very handly in
software development.  CS has a lot of really cool topics that will
expand the way you think about programming. If I could require
everybody to take both of them, I would.  But that would mean to many
credits.

So if you have other weird things you want to do - you might have to
pick.  But if you don't CS/SE (or SE CS it's slightly different
requirements wise) is a great pick.

## Let's do an example with our 4 year plan

# What CS course should I start with?

Ok, so there is a sequence of 3 courses that every CS/SE major needs
to take.  These courses are:

* CSSE 120 Introduction to Software Development 
* CSSE 220 Object-Oriented Software Development
* CSSE 230 Data Structures & Algorithm Analysis

Depending on your preparation you'll be placed in one of these 3
courses.  But which one?

## What if you have no experience?  No problem!

First thing to know is that the majority of Rose CS/SE students come
with no significant prior experience.  So if you have no prior
experience, that's usual.  CSSE120 is designed to be course from
nothing to basic programming proficiency and its good at that and not
too hard.  Just be sure you diligently do the assignments and you'll
be fine.

But conversely its just as important that if you do have some
experience you're placed in the right course.  Your first CSSE course
should be on the right level for you - there's no upside to spending
your first term bored.

## AP Computer Science A

This is the most common thing students come in with, and its the
easiest one to handle.  If you got a 4+ and shared your AP exams
scores with Rose-Hulman you should have gotten credit for CSSE120 and
be automatically placed in CSSE220.  Only thing you need to do is
check your starting schedule and make sure that's where your first
class is.

This is one case where in general you don't have to take the placement
exam, unless you took a different course following AP CS A.

## AP Computer Science Principles

If you took this course you'll get some elective credit but CSSE120 or
CSSE220 could make the most sense for you, depending on the details of
your course.  In this case you should take the placement exam to
figure out where you should go.

## Some Non-AP Class (or classes)

High School CS classes can be everything from pretty basic to very
advanced.  You should take the placement exam.

## Learned programming on your own or though a job

Great!  Obviously every individual learner's experience is different -
take the placement exam.

## The Placement Exam

So the placement exam is an online exam we use to place incoming
students into their first class.  Its designed to sort students into
120, 220, or 230 depending on their previous experience level.  Its
not super long or super hard, and you can use any programming language
you wish to solve its problems.

You should have been given the opportunity to take the exam either by
an email or link in your Rose-Hulman Moodle.  If you do not see such a
link and you'd like to take the placement exam, contact your advisor.

The only point of the placement exam is to find a good match for your
starting class.  It doesn't award you any credit, so you don't need to
think of it as high stakes.  Just go ahead, take it and do your best -
and then we will have a good starting point for where the department
thinks you should go.

BTW, if your just watching this now and you realize you missed the
placement exam and you need to take it - contact your advisor and they
can probably hook you up.

## Wait, the placement exam doesn't give you credit?

The way it works is that the placement exam allows you to bypass
perquisite courses but doesn't give you credit by itself.

So if you take the placement exam and are placed in CSSE220, you won't
get credit for CSSE120.  However, if you take CSSE220 and pass it, we
will retroactively give you credit for CSSE120 based on your grade in
CSSE220.  So it's the grade in 220 that gives you credit for 120.  For
folks placed in 230, it works the same but for 120 and 220 both.

For a practical perspective as a CS/SE major you don't need to worry
about the details - just take the course you're placed in and trust
the credits will work out.  But this does mean there's no benefit to
attempting to cheat on the placement exam.

## What If My Placement Exam Results Are Wrong?

Talk to your advisor - explain the situation and we can look into it
on a case by case basis.

Similarly, if you start taking some CSSE course based on the placement
exam and feel overwhelmed (or underwhelmed) talk to your advisor and
we can probably move you in the first few weeks.

## What if I am a REALLY advanced student who should skip CSSE230?

Our CSSE230 is a challenging course that has a take on data structures
that is pretty different from most other courses.  For that reason
even students who feel like they know data structures are placed into
CSSE230.  In my experience, no student has ever regretted taking
CSSE230 because it was too similar to a previous data structures
course - if you do have that experience, please tell me.

But if you really feel like your situation is very unusual, the place
to start is a conversation with your advisor.


# I Didn't Get the Classes I Needed!

In your first term you'll be registered for classes we think you need
(but maybe not every class you might want).  In later terms you'll
have to register for classes yourself.

Either way, you may find yourself in a situation where you want to
register for some class, but the class is full.  Or maybe you feel
like you critically need a class, but are worried it will be full
before you can register.

CS/SE enrollments are increasing right now, meaning this problem is
more intense in this department than some others.

What can be done?

## Registration Priority

So Rose-Hulman operates on a registration priority system.  Seniors
register before Juniors, Juniors register before Sophomores, etc.

The reason for this is students near graduation have less opportunity
to fix problems.  Seniors have to get every class they need this year
or they won't graduate.  Freshman have 3 years after to fix things.

Generally speaking, lots of AP credit does not affect your
registration priority.

So one thing is to realize that although it may seem like you can
never get any classes you want right now, that problem will be less
and less of an issue over time.

## We will get you in classes you critically need

When we have a student who needs to register for a particular class or
it will impact graduation, advisors and professors work together to
find a solution.  We will overload you into classes over limits, even
sometimes wave pre-reqs etc.

BUT in order to have the flexibility to do that for students who
critically need it, we generally can't accommodate students who just
want it.  Or who are like "well if I don't get into class X this term,
than I *need* to get in next term etc."

If you are unsure if you critically need a class in a particular term,
talk to your advisor.

## Preregistration

In CS/SE before registration there is a process where certain students
are registered for CS/SE classes before everyone, because of specific
critical needs.  You'll need signoff from your advisor and department
head before you can be preregistered, and its a process with specific
forms etc.  An email goes out every term - if you are aware of
problems keep your eye out for this email.

## Be flexible

As a freshman, your priority means its just not logical to look at the
published schedule and make self ideal "perfect plan".

Instead, the day before your registration make a big list of currently
open courses that would be useful to you (hint: almost all of them
will).  Then once registration opens keep trying to get into some
courses until you have something that works.

Get some classes, and then waitlist other classes that would be
better.

Look for unexpected gems - unpopular courses that might be really
cool.

## Keep an eye out

If there's some course you really want, keep a close eye on
registration.  Especially in the first week of classes you'll often
see drops of popular courses.

## Ask the professor (when it's a special situation)

If there's some unique need, the professor of the course might be
persuadable.  But make sure you have a reason (that's more than 'I am
impatient') and that you articulate that reason clearly.

This can be true of both pre-reqs and full classes.

But it's a favor not a sure thing.

# What should I do if things go bad?
# Internships
a

## Being desperate is not attractive!
